when you go down there it it's almost
like a theory oh it's so quiet all you
can hear is the submersible that you're
in and of course it's dark because
there's no light past 400 meters and
you're just surrounded by all of these
weird and amazing animals that are
adapted to live in this incredibly
extreme environment my name is Deever
Iman and I'm a deep-sea biologist I'm
currently based at the Natural History
Museum in London but I'm originally from
Trinidad and Tobago there are very few
careers that allow you to be amongst the
first people on the planet to see
something and that's what we do as
deep-sea scientists we are always
finding new species new habitats new
behaviours so little of it has been
explored I mean we really cannot answer
that incredibly basic question of what
lives there for most of our oceans
deep-sea biologists like Deva find out
about the species and habitats of what
lie beneath by sending robots or
autonomous vehicles to gather
information on their behalf all on rare
occasions she gets to go down there
herself
in a submersible with one tiny round
window per person to look out from it's
like a human-sized washing machine you
do get a perspective that you don't get
from using any other type of equipment
it's small and you can't stand it's that
small I mean of course I think it's
totally normal to be nervous before
going down to somewhere where no one can
come and rescue you if something goes
wrong you start to descend and all of
that were resource of goes away because
you're glued to the window
this tiny 6 inch sphere window as you
pass through the sort of Twilight Zone
there's just the most amazing
bioluminescence
like fireworks going off outside the
window just constantly for about half an
hour of every color shape description
before you know it you're on the deep
sea floor a big part of divas work is to
understand the threats that the
creatures of the deep are facing given
that resources on land and in shallow
waters are dwindling we now know that
certain areas of the deep sea may be
targeted for certain types of
exploitation so we can begin to think
about what might be endangered but there
are very few animals in deep sea that we
can categorically say are endangered one
deep-sea species that Deaver and her
team have studied is the scaly foot deep
seed gastropod also known as the scaly
foot snail or sea Pangolin the snail is
really remarkable because it has the
largest heart to body ratio of any
animal on the planet
it's the heart is about 4% of its entire
body for comparison humans is about just
over 1% because it lives in this metal
rich environment it uses a lot of those
metals to create these scales that cover
its foot and it literally looks like
it's wearing a sheet of armor it has
these bacteria within its body that uses
the chemicals coming out of the sea
floor where it lives to make its food
the scaly foot snail lives in places
we've only just discovered and find
almost impossible to get to and yet that
doesn't stop us causing havoc
we know that one is endangered because
they're only found in four tiny areas in
the Indian Ocean three of those four
areas are actually found in leases where
deep-sea mining may occur in the future
it's the first deep-sea species to be
added to the red list the IUCN's list of
endangered animals as a result of
deep-sea mining now that scientists know
they're down there they can monitor them
more effectively mining hasn't happened
yet but we can see that if it does those
animals are of the most vulnerable the
things you find on the ocean floor
aren't all as remarkable as the scaly
foot snail nearly every expedition I've
been on we see remnants of us last year
I was with the NOAA Ship Okeanos
Explorer and we were working in the Gulf
of Mexico in places of the Gulf Mexico
that no one had been to yet and we had
identified this target in our sonar
which looked a lot like a shipwreck he
was about 40 feet long and they had what
looked like a debris field around it and
that's like a characteristic thing of a
shipwreck and we had Betts going on
board like how old it would be what it
might have been used for and as we got
clearer we were like what the heck and
it turns out it was a shipping container
that had obviously fallen off of a ship
in the process been ripped open and that
debris field was washing machines
fridges freezers like dishwashers just
scattered all over the seafloor and it
was the most surreal experience to be
working at over one and a half
kilometers depth in the deep sea a part
of the deep sea that no one had been to
yet
and we're driving through household
appliances there was just this very
surreal experience
the deep sea is so fundamental to us
being here it is absolutely important
for these huge global processes that
keep our planet habitable it sequester's
carbon and it absorbs heat plays a
massive role in climate regulation
without our oceans we would not be able
to live here because our planet would be
so hot it cycles nutrients it toxified
our seas and it inspires us that's
something that people forget and I think
if you know the deep sea where to go
away we wouldn't be looking at a very
bright future at all
[Music]
you